README.md, before:

# crypto-vault

## Summary

Interfaces (CLIs, gRPC APIs, RESTful Web APIs) for managing cryptographic keys and securing data at rest

## References

- [OpenSSL with libp11 for Signing, Verifying and Encrypting, Decrypting](https://docs.yubico.com/hardware/yubihsm-2/hsm-2-user-guide/hsm2-openssl-libp11.html#rsa-pkcs)
- [pkcs11-tool usage](https://docs.nitrokey.com/nethsm/pkcs11-tool#id1)
- [OpenFGA online editor](https://play.fga.dev/sandbox/?store=github)
- [Adding gRPC-Gateway annotations to an existing proto file](https://grpc-ecosystem.github.io/grpc-gateway/docs/tutorials/adding_annotations/)
- [grpc-gateway Github repository](https://github.com/grpc-ecosystem/grpc-gateway)
- [grpcurl Github repository](https://github.com/fullstorydev/grpcurl)

## Features

### Functional

- [x] **RESTful API**: Provide HTTP endpoints to manage cryptographic material and secure data at rest.
- [x] **gRPC API**: Provide gRPC endpoints to manage cryptographic material and secure data at rest.
- [x] **Asymmetric encryption and decryption**: Support RSA encryption algorithm for data protection.
- [x] **Symmetric encryption**: Support for symmetric key encryption (e.g. AES) for data protection.
- [x] **Signature creation and verification:** Support for hashing algorithms (e.g. SHA-256, SHA-512) to create digital signatures and the ability to verify these signatures using asymmetric keys (RSA, ECDSA).
- [x] **PKCS#11 integration**: Enable key management and cryptographic operations (such as RSA-PKCS encryption/decryption and RSA-PSS or ECDSA signing/verification) through PKCS#11 interfaces supporting both FIPS-compliant hardware and software environments.
- [ ] **Manage cryptographic material and Key management lifecycle**: Enable management of private/public key pairs and symmetric keys and implement key lifecycle management
  - [x] Generation
  - [ ] ~~Import~~ (keys can only be generated by the system)
  - [x] Export
  - [ ] Rotation
  - [ ] Revocation
  - [ ] Expiration
- [ ] **Secure file storage integration**: Provide mechanisms to securely store encrypted files in BLOB storages
  - [ ] AWS S3
  - [x] Azure Blob Storage
  - [ ] Google Cloud Storage

### Non-functional

- [x] **Scalable and maintainable project structure**: Refer to the [project-layout GitHub repo](https://github.com/golang-standards/project-layout) and adopt Domain-Driven Design to create a **modular, flexible and maintainable** project structure with a focus on the **domain at its core**
- [x] **CI workflows for quality checks**: Set up continuous integration workflows with GitHub Actions for automated linting, functional and non-functional testing, building and pushing artifacts.
- [ ] **Security checks in CI workflows**: Consider non-functional testing (vulnerability scanning, SBOM generation, Static Code Analysis) in GitHub Actions.
- [ ] **Performance optimization**: Ensure cryptographic operations are optimized for performance, especially for large files and high throughput environments.
- [x] **Logging**: Integrated structured logging with Go 1.22+ `slog`
- [ ] **Distributed Telemetry:** Implement telemetry (e.g. OpenTelemetry with different backends, e.g. Prometheus, Grafana) to address distributed logging, tracing and monitoring concerns
- [ ] **Security**: Ensure that all cryptographic material and metadata is securely encrypted before storing it using a master key
- [ ] **Access control**: Secure APIs using authorization mechanisms including OAuth 2.0 and JWTs. Implement relationship-based access control (ReBAC) for APIs, ensuring that users can only perform operations on cryptographic material based on their defined relationships and permissions within the system.
- [x] **Documentation**: Provide clear API documentation (e.g. Swagger/OpenAPI) for ease of integration by other developers.
- [x] **Versioning**: Implement proper API versioning to maintain backward compatibility as the API evolves.
- [ ] **Audit logging**: Maintain logs of all cryptographic operations and key management activities for compliance and auditing purposes.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Go 1.25+ installed
- Docker (optional, for containerized deployment)
- Install the [DevContainer extension in VS Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-containers) and use the provided [devcontainer.json](.devcontainer/devcontainer.json)

If not using devcontainer, install dependencies for PKCS#11 integration on Debian 12+ or Ubuntu 22.04+:

```sh
apt-get update
apt-get install -y openssl opensc softhsm libssl-dev libengine-pkcs11-openssl
```

### Make targets

```sh
Usage: make [target] [PKG=./path/to/package] [TYPE=test,types]

Available targets:
  help                                     Show this help message

:Development
  format-and-lint                          Run formatting and linting
  lint-results                             Write golang-ci lint findings to file

:Testing
  tests                                    Run tests (use PKG=./path TYPE=unit,integration,e2e)
  coverage-check                           Run unit and integration tests for internal packages and check coverage threshold

:Coverage Reports
  coverage-html                            Generate HTML coverage report. Open HTML file using a HTML viewer in browser
  coverage-func                            Show coverage by function in terminal

:Docker
  compose-start-infra                      Start integration test containers (postgres, azure-blob-storage)
  compose-start                            Start all docker containers
  compose-stop                             Stop all docker containers

:Code Generation
  swagger-docs-gen                         Generate Swagger documentation
  grpc-files-gen                           Generate Go gRPC code from proto files

:Cleanup
  clean                                    Remove generated artifacts

Test type options (TYPE parameter):
  unit         - Run unit tests only
  integration  - Run integration tests only
  e2e          - Run end-to-end tests only
  unit,integration         - Run both unit and integration tests
  unit,integration,e2e     - Run all test types

Examples:
  make tests                                              # Run unit tests for all packages
  make tests PKG=./internal/pkg/config                    # Run unit tests for specific package
  make tests TYPE=integration                             # Run integration tests for all packages
  make tests TYPE=unit,integration                        # Run unit and integration tests for all packages
  make tests PKG=./internal/app TYPE=integration          # Run integration tests for specific package
  make tests PKG=./cmd/crypto-vault-cli/e2e TYPE=e2e      # Run e2e tests for specific package
  make coverage-check                                     # Run unit and integration tests for internal package and check code coverage
```

### Applications

You can find applications utilizing [internal packages](./internal/) in the [cmd folder](./cmd/):

- **[crypto-vault-cli](./cmd/crypto-vault-cli)**: Command-line tool for cryptographic operations
- **[crypto-vault-rest-api](./cmd/crypto-vault-rest-api)**: RESTful API service
- **[crypto-vault-grpc-api](./cmd/crypto-vault-grpc-api)**: gRPC API service with HTTP gateway

### Quick Start

**Option 1: Local Development**

```bash
# REST API
cd cmd/crypto-vault-rest-api
go run main.go --config ../../configs/rest-app.yaml

# gRPC API
cd cmd/crypto-vault-grpc-api
go run main.go --config ../../configs/grpc-app.yaml

# CLI Tool
cd cmd/crypto-vault-cli
go run main.go help
```

**Option 2: Docker Deployment**

```bash
# From project root
make compose-start
```

Access services at:

- REST API Swagger UI: `http://localhost:8080/api/v1/cvs/swagger/index.html`
- gRPC Server: `localhost:50051`
- gRPC HTTP Gateway: `http://localhost:8090/api/v1/cvs`

### Documentation

You can find documentation [here](./docs)

Commit message:

feat(api)!: implement API-first development with OpenAPI 3.0 specification (#43)
Closes #37

BREAKING CHANGE: Removed Swagger annotations and swaggo dependencies.
Generated types moved to internal/api/rest/v1/stub/.
Module path changed from crypto_vault_service to github.com/MGTheTrain/crypto-vault.
REST API server port changed from 8080 to 8081.

- Replace swaggo/swag with oapi-codegen v2.2.0 for Go-native code generation
- Add OpenAPI 3.0 specification (api/openapi/v1/crypto-vault.yaml)
- Generate REST API types from OpenAPI spec with oapi-codegen config
- Remove all Swagger annotations from handler code (blob_handler.go, key_handler.go)
- Delete manual DTO definitions (internal/api/rest/v1/dtos.go)
- Add CORS middleware (gin-contrib/cors) with wildcard origins and 12h max age
- Serve OpenAPI spec at /api/v1/cvs/openapi.yaml endpoint
- Configure Swagger UI with --network host for devcontainer compatibility
- Rename gRPC generated package from `__` to `stub`
- Move proto files from internal/api/grpc/v1/proto to api/proto/v1
- Add API-first validation CI workflow (.github/workflows/api-first.yml)
- Add ADR-003 documenting API-first development approach
- Update Makefile: replace swagger-docs-gen with openapi-* targets
- Update devcontainer: add Java feature, install oapi-codegen and @redocly/cli
- Update coverage exclusions for generated stub directories
- Update license copyright to 2024-2026
- Update README with new API access URLs and Makefile targets

README.md, after:

# crypto-vault

## Summary

Interfaces (CLIs, gRPC APIs, RESTful Web APIs) for managing cryptographic keys and securing data at rest

## References

- [OpenSSL with libp11 for Signing, Verifying and Encrypting, Decrypting](https://docs.yubico.com/hardware/yubihsm-2/hsm-2-user-guide/hsm2-openssl-libp11.html#rsa-pkcs)
- [pkcs11-tool usage](https://docs.nitrokey.com/nethsm/pkcs11-tool#id1)
- [OpenFGA online editor](https://play.fga.dev/sandbox/?store=github)
- [Adding gRPC-Gateway annotations to an existing proto file](https://grpc-ecosystem.github.io/grpc-gateway/docs/tutorials/adding_annotations/)
- [grpc-gateway Github repository](https://github.com/grpc-ecosystem/grpc-gateway)
- [grpcurl Github repository](https://github.com/fullstorydev/grpcurl)

## Features

### Functional

- [x] **RESTful API**: Provide HTTP endpoints to manage cryptographic material and secure data at rest.
- [x] **gRPC API**: Provide gRPC endpoints to manage cryptographic material and secure data at rest.
- [x] **Asymmetric encryption and decryption**: Support RSA encryption algorithm for data protection.
- [x] **Symmetric encryption**: Support for symmetric key encryption (e.g. AES) for data protection.
- [x] **Signature creation and verification:** Support for hashing algorithms (e.g. SHA-256, SHA-512) to create digital signatures and the ability to verify these signatures using asymmetric keys (RSA, ECDSA).
- [x] **PKCS#11 integration**: Enable key management and cryptographic operations (such as RSA-PKCS encryption/decryption and RSA-PSS or ECDSA signing/verification) through PKCS#11 interfaces supporting both FIPS-compliant hardware and software environments.
- [ ] **Manage cryptographic material and Key management lifecycle**: Enable management of private/public key pairs and symmetric keys and implement key lifecycle management
  - [x] Generation
  - [ ] ~~Import~~ (keys can only be generated by the system)
  - [x] Export
  - [ ] Rotation
  - [ ] Revocation
  - [ ] Expiration
- [ ] **Secure file storage integration**: Provide mechanisms to securely store encrypted files in BLOB storages
  - [ ] AWS S3
  - [x] Azure Blob Storage
  - [ ] Google Cloud Storage

### Non-functional

- [x] **Scalable and maintainable project structure**: Refer to the [project-layout GitHub repo](https://github.com/golang-standards/project-layout) and adopt Clean Architecture with Domain-Driven Design to create a **modular, flexible and maintainable** project structure with a focus on the **domain at its core**
- [x] **CI workflows for quality checks**: Set up continuous integration workflows with GitHub Actions for automated linting, functional and non-functional testing, building and pushing artifacts.
- [ ] **Security checks in CI workflows**: Consider non-functional testing (vulnerability scanning, SBOM generation, Static Code Analysis) in GitHub Actions.
- [ ] **Performance optimization**: Ensure cryptographic operations are optimized for performance, especially for large files and high throughput environments.
- [x] **Logging**: Integrated structured logging with Go 1.22+ `slog`
- [ ] **Distributed Telemetry:** Implement telemetry (e.g. OpenTelemetry with different backends, e.g. Prometheus, Grafana) to address distributed logging, tracing and monitoring concerns
- [ ] **Security**: Ensure that all cryptographic material and metadata is securely encrypted before storing it using a master key
- [ ] **Access control**: Secure APIs using authorization mechanisms including OAuth 2.0 and JWTs. Implement relationship-based access control (ReBAC) for APIs, ensuring that users can only perform operations on cryptographic material based on their defined relationships and permissions within the system.
- [x] **Documentation**: Provide clear API documentation (e.g. OpenAPI) for ease of integration.
- [x] **Versioning**: Implement proper API versioning to maintain backward compatibility as the API evolves.
- [ ] **Audit logging**: Maintain logs of all cryptographic operations and key management activities for compliance and auditing purposes.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Go 1.25+ installed
- Docker (optional, for containerized deployment)
- Install the [DevContainer extension in VS Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-containers) and use the provided [devcontainer.json](.devcontainer/devcontainer.json)

If not using devcontainer, install dependencies for PKCS#11 integration on Debian 12+ or Ubuntu 22.04+:

```sh
apt-get update
apt-get install -y openssl opensc softhsm libssl-dev libengine-pkcs11-openssl
```

### Make targets

```sh
Usage: make [target] [PKG=./path/to/package] [TYPE=test,types]

Available targets:
  help                                     Show this help message

:Development
  format-and-lint                          Run formatting and linting
  lint-results                             Write golang-ci lint findings to file

:Testing
  tests                                    Run tests (use PKG=./path TYPE=unit,integration,e2e)
  coverage-check                           Run unit and integration tests for internal packages and check coverage threshold

:Coverage Reports
  coverage-html                            Generate HTML coverage report. Open HTML file using a HTML viewer in browser
  coverage-func                            Show coverage by function in terminal

:Docker
  compose-start-infra                      Start integration test containers
  compose-start                            Start docker containers
  compose-stop                             Stop and remove docker containers

:Code Generation
  openapi-validate                         Validate OpenAPI specification
  openapi-types-generate                   Generate Go types from OpenAPI spec using oapi-codegen
  openapi-docs-generate                    Generate HTML documentation from OpenAPI spec
  openapi-docs-serve                       Serve OpenAPI documentation locally
  protoc-grpc-stubs-generate               Generate Go gRPC code from proto files

:Cleanup
  clean                                    Remove generated artifacts

Test type options (TYPE parameter):
  unit         - Run unit tests only
  integration  - Run integration tests only
  e2e          - Run end-to-end tests only
  unit,integration         - Run both unit and integration tests
  unit,integration,e2e     - Run all test types

Examples:
  make tests                                              # Run unit tests for all packages
  make tests PKG=./internal/pkg/config                    # Run unit tests for specific package
  make tests TYPE=integration                             # Run integration tests for all packages
  make tests TYPE=unit,integration                        # Run unit and integration tests for all packages
  make tests PKG=./internal/app TYPE=integration          # Run integration tests for specific package
  make tests PKG=./cmd/crypto-vault-cli/e2e TYPE=e2e      # Run e2e tests for specific package
  make coverage-check                                     # Run unit and integration tests for internal package and check code coverage
```

### Applications

You can find applications utilizing [internal packages](./internal/) in the [cmd folder](./cmd/):

- **[crypto-vault-cli](./cmd/crypto-vault-cli)**: Command-line tool for cryptographic operations
- **[crypto-vault-rest-api](./cmd/crypto-vault-rest-api)**: RESTful API service
- **[crypto-vault-grpc-api](./cmd/crypto-vault-grpc-api)**: gRPC API service with HTTP gateway

### Quick Start

**Option 1: Local Development**

```bash
# REST API
cd cmd/crypto-vault-rest-api
go run main.go --config ../../configs/rest-app.yaml

# gRPC API
cd cmd/crypto-vault-grpc-api
go run main.go --config ../../configs/grpc-app.yaml

# CLI Tool
cd cmd/crypto-vault-cli
go run main.go help
```

**Option 2: Docker Deployment**

```bash
# From project root
make compose-start
```

Access services at:

- REST API: `http://localhost:8081`
- Swagger UI for REST API: `http://localhost:8080`
- gRPC Server: `localhost:50051`
- gRPC HTTP Gateway: `http://localhost:8090/api/v1/cvs`

### Documentation

You can find documentation [here](./docs)
